Virtual State Channels whitepaper (#451)
aeternity/protocol: channels/virtual-state-channels.md

`channel_id`. Alice deposits 3 tokens in it and Ingrid deposits 2 from Bob's
behalf. If at any moment Alice tries cheating Bob, it would mean cheating
Ingrid and Ingrid has the incentive to protect Bob. Similarly, in BobIngrid
parent State Channel a channel object is created with same `channel_id` and
balances, it is just Bob locks his 2 tokens and Ingrid locks 3 for Alice. The
same incentive applies that if Bob is to cheat Alice, he has to cheat Ingrid
as well and she has the incentive to protect Alice. Ingrid's exposure of
locked tokens is `2 + 3 = 5`.

### Virtual State Channel object

Channel on-chain object holds various channel related data, including
participants, total balances dedicated to the channel and etc. It has all the
required information to safely close the channel, even in cases of a dispute.

#### Object structure

In cases of Virtual State Channels we produce a regular State Channel object
and wrap it around with some additional information. It consists of who the
intermediary is and the initial token amounts dedicated by the participant and
the intermediary. An important detail is that the initial token amounts for

> the participants are not according to the amounts they've dedicatrs: it is the

Author: Addressed

}
```

#### Object updates

The Virtual State Channel object is persisted in the state of the
corresponding parent State Channels and can be updated by providing off-chain
transactions that belong to the Virtual State Channel. Similar rules apply as
with on-chain State Channels: newer state replaces old one. Off-chain updates
contain a number `round` describing the point of time when the update had been
made. Since it is ever-incrementing, two off-chain updates can be compared. If
two share the same `round` and one is co-authenticated and the other had been
produced by some unilateral action, the former takes precedence over the
latter.

Virtual State Channel participants create and co-authenticate desired updates
and provide them to the intermediary in the respective parent State Channels.
In order for them to be applied there, the intermediary must also agree that
those are valid updates. If the intermediary refuses to cooperate, most of
those can be forcfully progressed on-chain. All of those will be explained in
detail.

A special case arises when both Virtual State Channel participants agree on an
off-chain update and one of them provides it to the intermediary while the

> other does not. Since Channel state can only be updated with a mutual

Reviewer: But would this happen? Didn't we say that the initiator of the update sends to the intermediary, and the intermediary forwards it to the other parent channel? This would be more similar to how it is on the chain (only one party posts to the chain, while the other gets notified of the on-chain change).

Author: Nope, it is the other way around: VSC participants create their updates and each of them provides them to the intermediary in their parent State Channels.

The other way around actually imposes a bit of a risk for the intermediary, namely:
1) Alice and Bob agree on stateX
2) Alice gives Ingrid the stateX
3) Ingrid gives Bob stateX but Bob refuses to update their VSC object

What shall Ingrid do now? In order for her to be safe, she must include that in their channel so she shall force progress it on-chain. On the other hand, Bob is in a possession of the update, already signed by Ingrid, and question is this gives him any advantage or not. If Ingrid ever authenticates an alternative update with the same `round`, she is in trouble.

A safer approach I am slightly in favour of would be both Alice and Bob provide her with the VSC off-chain update they have for her. If just one of them does it and the other does not, Alice could gently poke the non-cooperative one with a soft-force progress action or go directly on-chain forcing it there.

Author: I take that back. This is part of the category of problems _A proposes something authenticated to B, B refuses but is still in possession of the authenticated object_ . The worst thing could happen is Bob to force progress based on that particular state - hence approving it. The flow who tells who what should not really matter that much and we need propagation of messages in multy intermediary scenarios anyway.

The described approach is not mandatorary but prefered for the symmetry it provides.

Reviewer: But the safer approach would mean that Ingrid gets an update from Alice, and then waits for the same tx to be provided by Bob, eventually perhaps poking with a soft-FP. If Ingrid instead performs the soft-FP right away, Bob would be waiting in much the same way as in the on-chain case, and refusing would either have the result that Alice FPs on the parent chain/channel or simply solo-closes and declares the VSC uncooperative.

# Virtual State Channels

## Abstract

The Aeternity blockchain provides various means for scaling the transaction
throughput so it can accommodate billions of people. One of those is State
Channels. This document describes how State Channels protocol can be further
improved in order to build Virtual State Channels.

## Introduction

Aeternity blockchain already has two-party State Channels built on a protocol
level. They allow producing off-chain transactions. They allow not just
exchanging tokens off-chain but also executing smart contracts. That results

> in them not consuming neither `gas`, nor `fee` for their exectution. Off-chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in them not consuming either `gas`, nor `fee` for their execution. Off-chain
```

transactions also don't need on-chain confirmations so their speed is bound by

> participant's computing power and network bandwidth. This allows building

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the involved parties' computing power and network bandwidth. This allows building
```

cheap near real-time protocols while keeping the same amount of trustlessness
the blockchain already provides.

While this is already a great improvement to traditional blockchain solutions,

> participants are still expected to interact with the on-chain for certain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
participants are still expected to interact with the chain for certain
```

milestone events: opening a channel, depositing or withdrawing tokens and
closing a channel. As with any on-chain transactions, the higher number of
confirmations a transaction has, the better fork-safety it has. In the context

> of State Channels that results in big waiting times whenever the participants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of State Channels that results in long waiting times whenever the participants
```

need to modify the on-chain. This is to be improved with the introduction of
Virtual State Channels.

State Channels, also known as on-chain State Channels, use the on-chain

> blockchain both as a source of truth and as an arbiter in disputes. Virtual

Reviewer: "The on-chain blockchain" sounds funny

State Channels build on top of them allowing to use a third party - an
intermediary - as a source of truth or as an arbiter. It is crucial that, as

> with on-chain State Channels, a Virtual State Channel participant can protect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with regular State Channels, Virtual State Channel participants can protect
```

themselves from malicious acts. Since third parties providing Virtual State
Channel infrastructure can also act maliciously, at any point of time a
participant can bring a potential dispute on-chain and have it resolved there.
That way we keep Virtual State Channels as trustless as State Channels
themselves.

## Channels within channels

On-chain State Channels have a state. It is represented as a MPTree and has
the same structure as the on-chain state tree. A notable difference between
those would be that the off-chain state tree is limited just to accounts and
contracts. It does not allow having names, oracles or channels and the
corresponding trees are empty. The proposed Virtual State Channels solution

> consists of allowing channels to be present in the off-chain state. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows having channel objects stored in the off-chain state. This
```

requires a corresponding dispute mechanism that protects all parties'
interests and allows them to dispute the off-chain channel on-chain.

> Intention is instead of opening a State Channel on-chain, participants use an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The intention is that instead of opening a State Channel on-chain, participants use an
```

> intermediary. Both participants must have an already opened on-chain State

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intermediary. Both participants must have an already opened State
```

Channel with the intermediary. They open a Virtual State Channel within their
on-chain State Channel's context and continue using it as they would an
on-chain State Channel. Once opened, all off-chain Virtual State Channel
communication goes directly from one participant to the other. The

> intermediary receives only Virtual State Channel updates only when required to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intermediary receives Virtual State Channel updates only when required to
```
